# Once to Everyman

John Mark Agosta 2017

## Early Years, River Edge NJ

June 8th, 1954.  I'm told that when my mother woke up after I was born the first thing she asked was if the box of strawberries on the windowsill at home had ripened. Of course I don't remember anything from that time, so I'll just describe the milieu where I grew up. But I've taken virtual trips on Google StreetView back to places where I've been. The pictures of the place I was born show lush green, manicured, tree-lined streets, more so than I recall. 

### Family origins

Growing up I thought of us as the best a family could be - perfectly symmetric, with one brother, and one sister, with an uncle and aunt on both my mother Mary's side, and on my father, Vito's side, with male and female cousins on both sides. One of each. 

Looking back we were typical of the success stories of those Italian American immigrant families who came via Ellis Island in the first 2 decades of the 20th century. Vito's father, my namesake, came from a small mountain town, Vizzini, in Sicily, went back to fight for his fatherland in the first World War, then, as a decorated veteran, granted the order of knighthood of "Cavaliere", returned to the U.S. with his young bride. He never did much more, and regretted that his only son went to college instead of taking over the family pastry business. Mary's folks both came from a small mountain town, Saracena, just south of the Campania-Calabria border, among a set of Albanian speaking villages dating back to the Ottoman invasions that forced them out of Albania in the 16th century. The Romans named this area  _Magna Grecia_ that was settled by Greek colonists centuries before the Common Era. Locals still allude to the Roman takeover as the area's downfall. Religious, conservative, and looked down on, the best comparison to the southern Italians of the time might be to the Hillbilly mountain people in the U.S. 

Mary's father, known by many as "Uncle Charlie" started his own storefront businesses in East Hartford Connecticut, and made a good living.  He was known for his amiable character and generosity. My parents met after WWII, at U. Michigan. Vito was working on his masters in Engineering, paying his way as a cook in the Law School, and was Mary studying early childhood education. After marrying in 1952 they settled down in River Edge, NJ, in a house that Uncle Charlie helped his struggling son-in-law purchase. 

I was born at 324 Taft Rd. River Edge, about 7 miles from the GW Bridge to NYC. Soon after, a year and a half later, my sister, Diana was born,  and then my brother Chuck, after another year and a half, on Mother's Day. 

Still remember the way to walk the 5 blocks to "St. Peters Academy" the local parochial school that I attended for kindergarten and first grade. On Google StreetView I can virtually retrace my walk to school, in the neighborhood. Otherwise, in actuality I have never been back since we left in 1960.  School was monotonous, no play, and I apparently distinguished myself by drawing a life-like copy of a picture of a Nun. My main memory of school was the time Chuck followed me unbeknownst when I walked to school, I didn't know what to make of it when saw him outside the kindergarten window. There were nearby woods and a stream (hence the name, River Edge) crossable by a log. I had followed a neighbor kid, Ronnie, who was a year older showed me, who later, shoved me, so that I skinned my knee on the sidewalk - a scar I still have. River Edge was also the first time I had a bike. I remember Vito running alongside and pushing, moving faster than I thought possible.  But the bike didn't fall over, so I learned to ride without training wheels, 

Travel with the family was fully and only about visiting relatives. There were many and most spoke a dialect of Italian I didn't understand, and seemed to recently have arrived, or were soon on their way back to southern Italy. 

My childhood memories are largely happy and regret-free, which contrasts with the fear and anxiety I harbored.  I was inconsolably afraid of the dark.  I knew it made no sense, but when at night in bed I heard any small noise, I froze, and my hands sweated.  I could not sleep alone. Finally I saw a child psychologist, to what benefit I don't know (there was no behavioral therapy at the time.)  My father's solution was to give me a transistor radio to listen to under my pillow to lull myself to sleep. I often awoke to gentle music around dawn. The popular music of that time still rings in my ears.

I was also known as a stutterer. My father stammered severely as a child and gave me suggestions on how to counteract my speech impediment, but since I wasn't aware that I stuttered, I remained in denial about it.  I went to the speech therapist at school, Bob Mullen, who incidentally later organized a summer trip for high school students to Europe, and with a therapist at Hofstra, a local university. 

## Move to Greenlawn, Elementary School Years

Brooklyn Polytechnic opened a graduate school facility in Farmingdale, Long Island, as the aerospace industry stimulated by the Apollo project (the race to put a man on the moon) blossomed in Long Island.  Vito's job moved with it, so we looked for a place nearby.  The rural nature of the North Shore, which held numerous small stony beaches and harbors on Long Island sound was disappearing as the farms in the area were being sub-divided into tract houses on one acre plots. Our cousins, Aunt Jo and Uncle Angelo, with John and Fran had just moved from New Jersey, to Syosset, Long Island so we found a place in Huntington, the next town to the east, on a older street, Cherry Lane, that had a deep yard with a horse corral in the far back.  The horse-barn had burned down before we bought it, and there were charred remains in the over-growth. The house interior was decorated entirely in an oppressive royal blue.  Over the years we converted the garage into a family room (A addition that every suburban house needed), added a new garage, half bathroom off the kitchen, and a wood deck over the back patio.  The neighborhood yards were wooded, and not fenced along their back boundaries so we kids in the neighborhood---we had "the big kids" who led the troop of "the little kids" plus a dog or two---could go take paths from yard to yard.  Bikes were the major means of transport.  I had a "English 3-speed" by which I explored every road and bi-way bounded by the neighborhood's major arteries. 

The spring when we moved into the house in Greenlawn I was in first grade, and quickly came down with a case of mononucleosis that kept me out of school most of the rest of the year. Diana would start kindergarten the next September, and Chuck would start at the "Huntington Cooperative Nursery School" where Mary quickly found a part time position, based on her background in early childhood education. While I was in school Diana was teaching herself reading from my workbooks and the following year would be skipped to 2nd grade after her 2nd week in 1st. 

Mary continued to teach at the Nursery School through our high school years, returning home early evening after we got back from school. Mary had an avid interest in politics, and joined the League of Women Voters where she served as president. This merited having a second phone line run into the house.  Later on she would lead a campaign to create the local district library, which thrives to this day. 

The early '60s was a  time of exuberance, with the growth in the suburbs, Kennedy in office, John the XXIII'd in the papacy. We were part of a wave of progressive Catholicism, friends to any Jesuit who came through the parish, and caught up in the political and technical expansionism of the time. Sadly, at the same time, New York's inner city decayed and became a place to avoid; so unlike the current vibrant and attractive city it has become. 

I have an image of the time, of going outside the house with my Uncle Angelo at sunset, watching the early "Echo" satellite - an multi-story-high inflated sphere of aluminized mylar catch the sunlight as it streaked across the sky, to create a brief instant for a static-filled television broadcast across the Atlantic, that in a few years, with the advent of the Telstar satellites, became a common occurance.

Vito's work involved testing rocket engines, at bunkers that served as labs where he was associated as a researcher. Engineering at the time involved a level of excitement and danger unknown to today's software folks.  The engines were about the size and shape of an oatmeal box, bristling with tubes and wires, creating noise and flames beyond any fireworks you could imagine. 

About the time we moved Grandpa Charlie purchased a plot of land in a new subdivision and built a summer beach cottage at the end of Marshfield Road in Giant's Neck Heights CT.  This multi-level "cottage", whose interior was constantly in construction as we grew up had one bedroom for our grandparents, one for our family, and one for our Uncle Frank, Aunt Renie, and cousins Mar-lynn, Ivy and Charlie. Vito did the interior wiring, and because I was small I got the task to pull cable into the crawl spaces. We'd pack up and spend August "at the beach" each summer, as many New Englanders did. The cottage was nestled in oak forest, near a salt marsh - a "creek" crossed by the NY to Boston railroad mainline. We explored the area extensively, but never wandered much out of ear-shot of the house. 

Another part of growing up was to be part of the local Cub scout troop, where Vito volunteered as troop leader.  Some of my early friends also joined, including Paul Abe. None of us continued to become boy scouts.  As for "hobbies" model trains and planes fascinated me (and probably Vito, since he bought them for us). We had had an American Flyer layout in River Edge, then in 5th grade built an HO layout, in the basement, for which I learned to solder.  With surplus wiring from the rocket labs I wired up the circuits for the segments of track so multiple trains could be run. I never go far into adding scenery to the layout sadly. I also started music lessons, on viola, a practical choice distinguished from the violin, and not as awkward as a cello.  

### Year abroad, Blackheath, England

In 1967 Vito received a Fulbright Scholarship, to spend a year in London, at Queen Mary College. I thought this was pretty disruptive, but soon I realized what an eye opener it was for me. The trip to England was a four-day cruise, on the S.S. United States, leaving from Manhattan, and arriving, from a stop in Le Havre, at Portsmouth (?), England. I can only summarize a few memories; the entirety would easily fill the entire essay. Within a month we settled in a stately Victorian on Pond Road, which had been divided into flats, in Blackheath, just south of Greenwich, in greater London. Living in a major city, with easy public transportation -- the famous double-decker busses -- I took advantage to explore nearby on my own.  Coincidentally a family friend - Nancy Howe, daughter of the founder of the Nursery School was also living in London, with her newborn, Maya, having married a Spanish artist.

We were placed in the local Catholic schools. I believe as an exception, because being from the U.S. was a novelty, I was admitted "St. Joseph's", a state-supported Catholic school in walking distance, run by the De La Salle brothers. To give you a picture of it, it had a tinge of the weirdness, competitiveness, and parochialism of Hogwarts. I was put back a year into the first form, in part because I was smaller than the other boys there (it was all male), and I consistently achieved 1st in the Form. 

We took the occasions to travel in Europe on holidays. Nearby to the south were the white cliffs of Dover, with the ruins of Dover castle above.  We put the car on the ferry across the English Channel to Calais, then travelled through France - Abbeville, Rouen, The Cathedral at Chartres, Portier(?- an industrial city), then the sunny cities of Toulouse, Carcassonne, Perpignan, a nail-biting ride across the Pyrenees, finally arriving in a brooding Barcelona to hear the neighborhoods breaking plates on New Years. 

Over Easter we put the car on the train to (Milan?) Italy, then travelled south to see relatives, in Piza(?), Rome, Saracena and Siracusa. (Maybe I have this wrong - I recall the procession of Santa Lucia in Siracusa - which would have been just before Christmas.)

Then in the summer, after the spring term, driving north to Scotland, (another car on the train?) to (Hadrian's wall?), Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Inverness, (possibly Fort Williams, and Glasgow). We returned to the States on the Queen Elizabeth, car again in steerage. 

In short, I came back changed, no longer a child, my fear of the dark largely gone. Vito changed his work, closed the rocket lab he had run, instead emphasized his consulting and research, and got interested in sailing.

## Junior High and High School Years

It was an exciting time in England with the Beetles and the "British Invasion", but, on coming back Long Island appeared economically much better off than Europe. I was in the first class in a new Junior High School building. I breezed through most courses, coming across as a reflective kid, solitary, and bookish. Through junior high and high school we three "Agosta kids" did well academically without having to apply much effort, and participated in sports, music, and student government. I was active, but not necessarily prominent in student council, environmental club, track, and soccer teams.  My soccer came to an end in 10th grade when I contended with a soccer teammate for a ball during PE class. I tore the medial meniscus in my right knee.  This led to two operations and persistent chronic problems to this day. 

I can't recall dating, but I was part of a mixed crowd that occasionally went out together. I had my eyes on several girls in the class but I was too socially timid to pursue them. I probably spent more time by myself than most. It was a time when academic excellence wasn't given much regard, and those of us so oriented were looked on as misfits.  We filled a classroom or two out of the school in the honors track. Consequently we didn't mix much with the rest of the class that was enveloped more in athletics, sex, and the excesses of the 60s. 

If not in some extracurricular activity, I spent my time afterschool in the cellar, in the shop or darkroom, building model planes and trains, reading popular science, and keeping a few close friends who shared common interests in music or in environmental and political progressivism.  I had a good eye, and a knack for candid photography with my rangefinder 35mm black and white camera, and wound up taking many of the pictures that were used in the Senior yearbook. Our friends formed an environmental club, centered around a "publication" consisting of a portable folding placard, that we carried around to avoid the waste of consuming and distributing paper copies. 

Back from Europe, Vito had bought a sailboat, a Rhodes-18, the first of several, and we as a family built our summer weekends around sailing, gardening, church, and visiting grandparents when not in Niantic. Our Boscia-cousins had moved to Rockville Maryland, so we only saw them on alternating holidays. 

Coming back after 1968, it was a watershed year, as the Vietnam protests broke. The Vietnam war became our political awakening into protest and set the tone for years. College campuses and war protests became synonymous. From the beginning we believed the war should be brought to an immediate and complete end. This divided the country with strife not seen in anyone's memory. It divided who you spoke to, what music you listened to, what books you read, and what events and sports you went to. We saw ourselves as an educated and enlightened minority, as the issues of militarism, environmentalism, racism, and feminism melded inseparably into a unified world-view. An expression of this was an underground high-school newspaper, "Dog's Breath" that attained distribution over several local high-schools. Ironically, kids who had been pre-schoolers at the Huntington Cooperative Nursery School seemed to be substantially over-represented in this crowd.

We read avidly to bolster our beliefs. Siddhartha and Gandhi on non-violence, Vonnegut and Brautigan for the absurdity of life, and Joyce, on being an intellectual growing up Catholic. Catholicism was expansive enough to contain my beliefs. I was a regular lector in Church. This was my exposure to the Scriptures, which incidentally gave me novel insights when I studied classic literature in college. I must have come across and serious, clerical nature since upon graduation, our parish priest, Father Colligan approached me about joining the priesthood. If anything I was overly-focused on the future, and probably would have enjoyed high-school years more if I cut loose a bit more often. 

As the war dragged on, the draft deferment for college was removed, and a draft lottery replaced it.  I participated in the second year of the lottery, where I received a low draft number. I seriously considered seeking conscientious objector status, and met with a member of our church to work it out. Fortunately the draft ended that year, and none of my year were called. 

In Junior year my speech teacher Bob Mullen took on a project to organize summer tours for high school students. Several of my close friends expressed interest, and all in all about 20 of us spent 8 weeks over the summer travelling through Europe with Bob and 2 other adults. Europe was still cheap by U.S. standards, so for around $1000 paid for our travel, room, and board.  We ran through each city in 2-3 days, charging through an itinerary of London, Paris, Koln, Heidelberg, Barcelona, the island of Ibiza, Florence, Rome, Athens, and finally a tour of the Greek Islands that was largely confined to Mykonos, due to winds that made sea travel in the small chartered boat impossible. I had a chance to visit again some of the folks we met when we lived in England.  Bob's project expanded to a side career that grew to include other teachers, and a few years later Chuck spent the summer living on Neckar Island and sailing in the Caribbean on a similar arrangement. 
 
## "Bright College Years"

I had little idea of how to choose a college, and my mom had some suggestions of small liberal arts colleges, such as Hamilton and Colby.  But when my SAT scores came back, as among the top in the school, Ray Brett, my guidance counselor suggested I look at Yale. Ray was a Korean War veteran, well educated in Chinese history, I thought Yale preferable as a smaller school than Harvard, so I basically dis-regarded the Ivies.  In short, it was one of the 5 schools I applied to, all of which I got into. I had visited Wesleyan in Middletown CT, (The first time I ever got stoned.) and was dedicated to going there; then on a visit to Maine, with a chance to think it over, and with a hint from my Dad, changed my mind.  Both Chuck and Diana would wind up going to Wesleyan. 

Yale opened up such amazing vistas in knowledge and experience that I greedily tried to pursue it all. Again there's another book to be written about the people I met in my college years, which will have to wait for another time. Among the people I met were five classmates all named John on the top floors of my Freshman entryway. From then on I adopted "John Mark" as a nickname, as given me by my Aunt Jo, to distinguish me from her son John, in place of "Nonnie", her childhood nickname for me.

I avoided the "intro for non-majors" courses, and took the intro to the major classes in Physics, Math, Philosophy, English, Italian, and History.  Consequently I vacillated back and forth as to direction, and, as motivated as I was, my grades were miserable. Furthermore, I was not one to seek direction or advice from any trusted advisor, and did not recognize or was too self-effacing to realize when someone reached out to me. As a consequence I developed amazingly broad interests, with limited focus in any area. 

Music was part of my identity, and I failed auditions for the Yale Symphony all four years. I rushed one of the singing groups, and would have gotten in, but was laid up when my knee flared up and didn't go to the rush party. Then sophomore year, I came back after spring break to find my room-mate had several cases of vodka stashed in our fridge for a Russian club. I checked it, out, was asked to sing a few lines, and joined a nascent effort to revise a group called the Yale Russian Chorus. I've stayed with this interest to the present day.

Eventually I did major in Physics, amid the polymath smattering of coursework my degree included. Had I counted my courses more carefully, with one or two changes I could have double majored in Physics and Philosophy.  I believe Physics always was my intended major, and still identify with the way of thinking it teaches, although my actual knowledge of Physics I must admit is limited. 

Each summer between classes was a chance to do something new. After freshman year Vito had managed to get me an NSF student project to model the "Dynamics of a Golf Club Swing."  This was my first attempt at research, the entire project coming together one day when a senior visiting scholar, Gino Moretti, gave me a suggestion on the solution. These learnings were significant, which I draw on to this day, though I had little regard for what I had accomplished at the time. Spending time with Vito in the office during the project I got a better sense of his profession, something that had puzzled me to that time, as I as a kid had perused the tomes in his office. 
 
At the end of the summer I flew out to California, to visit Jonathan Livingston, who would become one of my sophomore roommates. He lived in Sausalito, and when I arrived it is an understatement to say I couldn't believe how enjoyable and beautiful a place could be. My cousin John B. had driven across country with a friend Larry and his dog, Nada, in his Ford Pinto hatchback and met us.  The Livingston's graciously put us all up, including Nada. After a couple weeks (?) we drove south, camping on Big Sur, Needles CA, The Grand Canyon, Winslow AZ, Santa Fe, Denver, then in one leg back to Pittsfield MA where Larry lived. 

Sophomore year was a hard year, given the scattered subjects I attempted. I heard about the summer work my roommate Steve Silverman had the previous summer as a kitchen aid at the Grasshopper archeological field school of the University of Arizona.  Steve wasn't sure I was up to the task, but I applied and went back with him to Tucson that summer, then to the Apache White Mountain Indian reservation where I spend two months in about as remote and enchanting an environment as one can imagine. Again memories abound.

The summer after Junior year I stayed in the house that Steve & a few crew jocks (I had rowed lightweight crew freshman year, to loose a shirt in every race) rented off campus on 34 Winchester Drive---just down the street from the Winchester Arms Factory. Junior year I had taken a course on data collection where we were given access to a late-model PDP-8 mini-computer, with which I figured out we could build a pong game instead. This got me a summer job in the Applied Physics under William Lichten, a job I continued through senior year. The campus was largely vacant over the summer, so a group of us "lab rats" had run of the campus, to enjoy the Connecticut summer. (Later on I roomed with Henry Hu that summer, who was doing economics research.)

## Early Work 

### A Year in Turin, IT.  Olivetti

Most of my classmates had either professional or educational goals upon graduation, but I hadn't made plans except to find an opportunity to pursue the romantic idea of taking up life abroad. I found a work-experience organization called "IAESTE", typically that provided vocational apprenticeships among European countries, that found an a-typical full-year opportunity for me with the Italian computer company, Olivetti. Again I found my niche modeling the physics of the copier machine processes for machines they sold in Eastern Europe. This was also an opportunity to immerse myself in Italian life, then in the midst of turbulent politics during the "compromesso storico", and to make some long-term acquaintances in Turin. 

### Federal Government, during the Carter Administration

I got back from Italy just in time to attend my cousin Fran's wedding, with no arranged plans, so I spent the fall doing a career search. I soon decided to go to Washington D.C. since government "policy" work was a burgeoning field, my mother had some connections there, and I could move in to the group house with my cousin John Boscia. I had a list of people in government positions to talk to, from a college seminar I had taken on cooperative space ventures, and after following up on numerous dead ends, got an application for the "science policy" program at George Washington U., and a suggestion from the faculty that if I applied I could start immediately, in January. I also answered a blind classified ad in the newspaper, was invited to take a math test (where I heard later that I got a perfect grade), which got me a position writing software for CNA - a military "think tank," working on secret studies. We had an amazing master computer kept in a sealed room, but as a programmer I had no choice in my projects. The office, the "Marine Corps Operations Analysis Group" was run by a bunch of southern good-ole boys, and as much as I was learning, I didn't fit in.

The evening courses at GW were small and interesting, and I got offered a plum opportunity to intern at a new office of "Strategic Analysis" in the newly formed Environmental Protection Agency R&D Office, where I became the first staff member to the lead "strategic assistant to the deputy director." So I quit CNA and I continued working full time for several years while taking part time classes toward a masters degree. Since I was in the head office I had the run of the place, and could explore most anything going on in the executive branch or "on the Hill," in the area of Energy & Environment. I got good at writing short, punchy memos on a late model IBM "Selectric" typewriter, in triplicate, that were routed to other offices in a government-issued re-usable manila envelope. Word processors were just being invented. The office administrator ("secretary"), was a conscientious young black guy who liked me since I did my own typing, unlike all the other guys in the office. I was always the most junior "bright kid" in the office so I got involved in a wide range of projects, culminating in working in the Executive Office of the President on the Global 2000 study.

Meanwhile John B.'s house lost it's lease and housemates moved on, and he bought his own apartment.  He was hobbled by a broken leg from a bad motorcycle accident as a passenger, which had him in a cast for over a year while it healed. John B. had a close group of college friends that enjoyed each other's company over dinner and at parties. How much so was revealing that at his funeral this year I had a chance to meet them all and exchange memories again. John was a "closeted" gay, and I never thought much about it, in part because I admired how well he fit in with his mixed crowd. Every Sunday we would go to family dinner at Aunt Jo's, and John B. would be trying to stay awake, having just be coming off a 48 hour stint in the hospital where he was a resident.  I made numerous friends of my own, both through school and my alumni connections, and dated regularly, but in retrospect, none of those acquaintances endured much after I left D.C. 

Then in 1980 Ronald Reagan was elected on a Washington D.C. outsider platform and the EPA's activities were severely constrained. The economy had not recovered from the 70s and my boss said this was a good time to go back to school.  It was hard to get back into re-taking the GREs, but I finished up a few incompletes I had to get my Masters degree and applied to several schools, including an, at the time, lesser known west coast school, Stanford, where I had met Jim Sweeney on the faculty of the Engineering Economic Systems (EES) Department, which might have made the difference in my getting in.

Over the summer I flew back to Italy with my grandfather Charlie, where he had not been since visited in the '50s with his kids before they got married. I then travelled up to the French Riviera, stopping at a campground in Raphael (?) just to explore.  I have a distinct memory of being on the beach, having friended an English couple and listening to the radio broadcast of Princess Diana's wedding. So the next September I loaded up my car, got a rider, left DC and drove to California. 

Driving out to CA to school was the second time I drove cross-country, not counting the bus ride with the Russian Chorus in Junior year. I did the drive twice more to return for an internship after my first year at Stanford. I would line up drivers on the campus ride-board, and the three of us would drive in 8 hour shifts round the clock. On my return I drove across the Mohave and from then on the Toyota Corona I had ran poorly if at all.

## Stanford Graduate School 

I had visited Stanford probably 3? years before I applied, on a Sierra Club volunteer trail-work trip to the "Hilton Head watershed" in the eastern Sierras (my memory is that was while still working at CNA at the time), and met some faculty kids.  I had probably also been in Palo Alto during the Chorus trip after my junior year but I didn't pay much attention since we were just breezing through one town after another. 

Looking for a topic, I intended to continue working in the area of Energy and Environment, however the Graduate School encourage exploration, and the EES department had an open view toward multi-disciplinary study.  This attracted a wide range of students notably from both the Air Force (AFIT?) graduate school and from the opening towards the west in Mainland China. I soon became caught up in the wave at that time in Artificial Intelligence research as popularized a round expert systems, although our approach was rooted in probability and decision science, and the Department joined a renegade subdiscipline to the field that did not accept the basis on formal logics that was the mainstream at the time. In short this is how I became familiar with Bayesian methods that have grown steadily in popularity. 

A friend in Aero-Astro got caught up with a group led by the business school was planning a conference on Entrepreneurship and I volunteered to write the scheduling algorithm for the sessions. This incidentally got me an account on the business school's computer, a rare privilege. The night before I stayed up all night printing badges, on a borrowed computer printer, then pulled off a 1000 person event the next day. The university and much of the school at large looked askance at the club, entrepreneurship at the time considered a fringe pursuit.  

A few months after I arrived Margaret had come to the Bay Area to start as the product manager for 'Opcom', a startup building a computer-like device that did something no one had ever heard of, called "voicemail." Startups of that day were more substantial, involving serious hardware; not the realm as today, of 20-somethings. In early Silicon Valley there weren't huge amounts of money as there are today, and the rest of the country largely overlooked what was going on here. 

Frances Quittel ran a career advisory chapter for local Yale club, and in a few words I met Margaret there, we talked afterwards, outside, then made plans for a date to see an the opera Die Fledermaus. It was not long before Margaret rented a small place in Palo Alto, and at the end of the summer, when my lease on campus ended I moved in with her.  We have been together constantly ever since. 

### Robotics Lab

I lacked research grant funding, but I was rooming with someone in the well-funded Aeronautics Department (EES certainly was not) who mentioned the Robotics Lab had a unstaffed grant from IBM. By and by Tom Binford, the head of the lab came to know my work, and put me on the grant, so I joined the Lab.  Tom was painfully introverted, bordering on Asperger's, to the point of lapses of excruciating periods of silence during advising sessions, but he was dedicated to his students and we got along. The grant ended a few years later, long before I had a completed thesis, but I found one means of support after another, including a steady stream of tasks to setup and train the newly introduced set of Macintosh computers in the Marketing department at Margaret's startup.  I bounced around from one opportunity to another, taking classes throughout the university as suited my unbridled curiosity, spending years making little obvious progress.  Part of it was getting caught up in the fascination around the aura of the new computer, the Macintosh, released by Apple. I was among the first 100 students on campus to receive one of the original Mac 128s by lottery.  "Users Groups" sprung up all over, and I somewhat reluctantly assumed the presidency of the unfortunately named "Stanford Macintosh User's Group", which was overshadowed by the massive groundswell at Berkeley that created the several thousand member user group, BMUG.

Margaret had me tag along on some of her business trips, where occasionally I would mascarade as a systems engineer at sales meetings. This was easy; my basic computer knowledge vastly outstripped that of those sitting across the table from us. An incidental benefit of Margaret's job were the substantial accumulated frequent flying miles. So in 1987 we made a trip around the IJCAI conference in Milan to visit Egypt cities Giza, Karnak and Aswan, carrying the conference proceedings after failing, when we visited Alfredo in Turin, to find a way to mail them home from Italy.

The lab's senior post-doc was Jean Ponce, a French mathematician, whose work I struggled to understand, just as he was puzzled by the Bayesian approaches I was wed to. He came to California with his older sister, Brigitte, tall and stunningly attractive, who despite having acquired a work visa at some expense, kept house for him. She had her eyes on John Canny, who had just started on the faculty at Berkeley and who showed decided ambivalence toward her. To this end, she frequently entertained collections of the Stanford and Berkely labs at dinners that invariably ended with drunken reveries and her brother singing "Danny Boy." Ponce eventually got a faculty position at Champaign-Urbana, and Canny never acceded to Brigitte's intentions.  

### Wedding

On a trip to NYC around Thanksgiving 1988 I proposed to Margaret one afternoon at the children's zoo in Central Park, on the way to the Met, and on the way to meet my parents. Organizing the wedding took most of the year for planning, and I had enough unstructured time to work with Stanford facilities. The first date that the Stanford Memorial Chapel was available was Oct 8th of the following year. As a student we could reserve space on the campus for the reception, so I settled on a secluded garden at the Stanford mausoleum that matched the neo-Egyptian theme of the wedding. Slavyanka sang at the ceremony, led by our classmate Stephen Armstrong, a Jesuit at USF. Two weeks later the Loma Prieta earthquake damaged the Chapel and we were one of the last couples lucky to wed there for years to come.

I remember the time after the marriage Margaret was deep into the VMX-merger management changes, flying to Dallas every other week to take over the corresponding team there. We were able to use her frequent-flyer miles over the years to return to Europe with some regularity.

By the end of the 1980's I had had little success advancing my thesis ideas on "decision flexibility" in the EES department, so several years into the program I came up with some ideas about how to apply Bayes networks to grouping image features to recognize objects. In my department, Don Dunn, who specialized in telecommunications and law, continued to encourage me, despite having no connection to the substance of the work. It was his backing, and Tom's intellectual curiosity in trying to unify Bayes networks and computer vision that made my thesis work possible. In 1987? I had felicitously connected an acquaintance from CMU Robotics (whom I had met since he was funded by the same IBM grant I had been on) with the new automated Apple Macintosh factory, where his outstanding ability quickly got him hired. He thought well of me, and he got me a contract working on testing software for the first portable Mac, while I was getting a series of conference papers published on my research, but my candidacy (the period when I was eligible to submit my thesis) was running out, my advisor and I were hardly on speaking terms, and I was feeling utterly hopeless about how to complete the work.  Then around the beginning of the year ?1988? my Apply contract ran out.  By summer I had a thesis draft, and the department to my surprise consented to hearing my oral defense.  The meeting began by my advisor posing an apparently easy but poorly formed question based on his vague knowledge of the thesis.  Tom, completely out of character, pounced on him for his audacity to claim some knowledge of the field, and I hunkered down in my chair, saying little as the argument continued. So I passed my oral defense. My advisor never did read my thesis, excusing this as a claimed courtesy to me, and we never co-authored any work. 

What one does with one's days eventually becomes what one does with one's life, so although conferences and travel formed life's highlights, we had a regular pattern to our free time. On weekends Margaret would make biscuits or strudel for breakfast, then we'd go out to one of the open spaces, typically Rancho San Antonio, and we'd hike or jog the miles of trails. Afterwards usually we'd grab lunch, then peruse the shelves at one of the several used book stores.  We couldn't leave without armfuls of used books that today grace our shelves. 

## The 90's, Starting a Family.

Upon graduation I didn't do much of a job search; AI was still an exotic field, the Internet was just about to reach the popular imagination, and I didn't want to look for an academic position, which probably would mean leaving the area. Margaret was earning a good salary, so I looked for local research positions. Today a person with computer or engineering degree would have recruiters chasing them, but it took me a few months to find a position eventually in the consulting side of SRI. 

As I completed my thesis I was approached by a visiting Japanese researcher in the lab to spend a year at the "Electro-Technical Lab" that was just starting the "6th Generation Computing Project" in Tsukuba Japan, just north of Tokyo. I was in Japan at the time of my graduation ceremony on account of the trip, but I was so jaded by grad school that I can't say I missed it.  This was my first experience in Japan; there was much to absorb, but since I had started work at SRI, my employer was eager to have me return rather than spend the entire year. In short I didn't get much done the summer I was there, but I was impressed by the graciousness and hospitality they offered.  

This was a time when Margaret worked for a sequence of startups, which after all the years together finally paid off enough so we decided to invest it in a new kitchen, until we realized it would be easier to move into a new house than try to make then changes we wanted to our old one. So, from the startup money Margaret made, we seriously began looking for a new house. This became a major use of our "free time" when, every weekend, our infinitely patient novice real estate broker, Jeff Preston, would meet us and drive us to view recently listed houses. This went on for a year, during which we visited over 100 houses, from Sunnyvale to Menlo Park, many that we referred to by nicknames we assigned them. This dragged on until, on Easter 1995 we were having an elaborate dinner with our friends, the Frybergers, and the thought came up - what about the house we've seen earlier in College Terrace? It was larger than we needed, lacked much yard space, and in such pristine condition, I couldn't quite see us in it. We checked with Jeff the next day, and found the price had come down, and we could afford it---by summer we had moved in. At just this time Rob Teets, who I knew as president of the Slavyanka Chorus decided to follow a young woman he knew and take a temporary assignment in Moscow, so for safe keeping he lent us 3 bookcases, part of his library and his law school roommate's baby grand piano to help furnish our new place. 

The SRI consulting side was a dysfunctional group on a downward spiral, so I made a connection with the engineering side, and, at the invitation of one of their team leaders, Roberto Desimone, switched departments.  Roberto and I did interesting work, in automated planning, first for the Air Force, then for the Coast Guard. When the research contracts ended Roberto left to return to England. SRI was not able to attract funding, and people were being laid off, so I jumped at an offer from a classmate, Eric Horvitz, to restart a small software firm, "Knowledge Industries", whose two employees, both graduate students, had left. This was a great experience, but sad to say, while the internet was just exploding, the CEO was unable to raise any money or business prospects, and we were not able to hitch a ride on the exploding economy. 

Its hard to imagine how "normal" the '90s seem in retrospect, before the glare of the Internet, and the horror of 9/11 colored lives. And it's hard to sort out single events amid a parade of work, travel and family visits. Chuck & Diana got married, Chuck at a country house in New Hampshire, Diana at the justice of the Peace in NYC, just before Christmas; then that summer we held a reception in Mary & Vito's backyard. Chuck's work brought him to Los Alamos Lab over one New Year's and he stayed near by in Jaconita, at "Rancho Jacona" that rented adobes. In following years we made this a occasion for family reunions, interspersed with summer visits to a family rental on Cape Cod. A couple times we got visitors in California, in part because Lucy got a position at Intel that brought her west periodically.  Margaret got an invitation to speak in Japan that brought us back to Tokyo, and with her frequent flyer miles we could pay for occasional trips to Europe when we wished. 

Slavyanka chorus was my weekly activity, commuting up to the city for rehearsal one evening a week, and spending several weekends a year in concert around the state within a days drive - Modesto, San Luis Obispo, Redding, Fresno, Walnut Creek, and regularly in Berkeley. We made major plans to go to Russia in 1999, and I bought two tickets for Margaret and I to go. 

Life's enjoyments were clouded by our inability to have a child. We saw many doctors, tried many fertility treatments, of increasing and substantial complexity and expense over a decade, to the point where it was the major concern in our lives. Margaret was dedicated and we made frequent trips to our doctor in Santa Rosa, staying at the Flamingo, a campy resort hotel in town. The story of our lives would be different today if not one day in May of 1999, we got the surprising news that we were expecting twins. The pregnancy, given the condition was risky, and Margaret wisely decided not to travel outside of the reach of U.S. medical care. 

What was I to do with the extra ticket to Russia?  On a thought I called Vito and asked if he'd come.  He replied - "Let me ask Mary," and that evening I had solved the problem.  So we travelled together to Russia, and I saw a new side of my dad, together as father and son.  The chorus loved him, and the trip, from Helsinki, to Saint Petersburg, Novgorod, Psokv, then Moscow was a vision into a deep musical culture. I would join the chorus on a similar, repeat trip in 2016. 

Sometime about this time I have pictures of Margaret with Lucy, who visited, pregnant with her third. Indications of complications arose, to the point where Margaret was put under observation in the hospital in December. This showed amazing prescience by Dr. Rydfors, so a few days later, I got a call to come to the Stanford Children's Hospital, and, in short order the twins were born, a month early. "Girl A" and "Boy B" spent 10 days in the NICU---knowing they were in expert care was a blessed relief after the uncertainty of the pregnancy. 

From then on life changed, and we haven't looked back. Mary and Vito, and Diana and Kenny came to visit, just in time for us to take pictures of them for their adoption application.  Barbara - a local divinity student at the time  wife of Bob Kenley, a classmate, put us in touch with a nanny who had come over to work for a Finnish executive. Wrestling with a bit of the "Au pair" bureaucracy we were able to employ Christa through the program.  She was trained in nursing and childcare, and became part of the family, eventually marrying Lamont, who she met here, then sadly returning to Finland when the twins were in 3rd grade. 

## The 2000's Internet Bubble

Initiated by the exuberance of the internet bubble, job prospects increased as duration of employment decreased.  After 6 years at SRI, I moved to KI for 2 years, then Edify- 2 years, Intel- 8 years, Impermium - 1/2 year, Toyota - 2 years, C9- 1/2 year, now Microsoft.

Work pitched back and forth with some regularity, from discouraging to exciting, depending on the project and who I was working with. For some highlights: At SRI we spent a day in the bowels of the Pentagon, learning how Air Force planned air campaigns. At KI we built the first comprehensive web-based automotive diagnostic, flying out weekly to Seattle, WA or Saint Paul, MN, where the client was, just around the time Bella and Alex were born. Then at Edify we worked with University of Edinburgh, having a chance to travel there with the family, and staying in a well-kept Victorian where the kids had run of the house. This was a happy time, as we believed that the internet had changed life forever -- not unlike the current attitude as I write this; then it all came crashing down, and we, along with most of high-tech was unemployed. It spawned a strange feeling of calm, both of us at home with toddlers and Christa, with only our savings to keep us going.  Fortunately, the industry is resilient, and within a few months I had a bona-fide research position at Intel. A Business Fellowship with the Santa Fe Institute gave me a chance to travel to that magical part of the country again. Sadly, the projects I was on were never put to use, and I probably should have left Intel sooner, as the labs mission diminished, but I liked the colleagues I was working with. So I left when I was recruited to join a small startup in walking distance from the house. There were just 5 of us, one remote in India, and much as I got along with the chief engineer, it was clear I was not enough of the software engineer that they needed at the time. Again, this followed a period of unemployment, then recruitment by Toyota ITC, for a small user experience lab they ran in Mountain View.  This was a deep immersion in Japanese culture from the inside, being run closely from the Tokyo sister office. I looked forward to the annual trips at year-end (March in the Japanese calendar) to offices in Akasaka Tokyo. In my second year I took off into new directions, running a design "charrette" workshop on the personal travel experience, and a hackathon on driver user experience.  Both wound up badly, as they gained no acceptance with management.  That began another cycle of startup - unemployment - then re-employment, this time getting caught up in new changes underway at Microsoft.

Despite a varied career, no chapter of which turned truly lucrative, I've always been financially comfortable. The current time of professional growth, so late in my career has been accompanied by a period of intense personal growth and change, to adapt with my aging and that of friends and family members, not to mention with also the worries that arise in raising teenagers. 

#  Looking back

Looking back I'm amazed how clear in my mind - if not entirely accurate - are my images of the places I've lived and traveled.  My view of the last few years is too recent to reduce to a series of stories, and I will have to write the last chapter after time distills its memories. One cannot see the full significance of events as they are happening. I could not have anticipated all the ups and downs, and I expect the future to reap more surprises.  

If there's one book I identify with (but which I cannot seem to finish reading) it's Wallace Stegner's "Angle of Repose", about a 19th century mining engineer from the Yale Sheffield School who travels west soon after the civil war to find one undertaking after another not meet expectations; the story is told in the 1960's by his invalid grandson who, as he tells the story, sees significant meaning in this life.

I have a recurring dream where I am riding on my bike very late at night, on an unknown commercial road, of endless superstores and dealerships. I have a destination in mind, and only a vague sense of where I am and how far to go. Miles go by and the night is balmy, traffic light, and the riding is effortless. But my thoughts are filled with whether this route is correct, and with what lies on the road ahead: in the dark, the grades, and the weather. 

I can look back with the romantic gaze of hindsight, about the choices I made, in light of knowing what I know now. But the source of inevitable regrets are long gone, and are balanced by the amazing and unanticipated trip it's been. 
