---
layout: post
title:  "Are You Smarter Than an 8th Grader?"
date:   2015-05-05
categories: jekyll update
---

This comes from a Op Ed piece by Nicholas Kristof in last Sunday's
NYT.  There's a discussion of it in his blog, at
http://kristof.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/25/that-pesky-problem-of-two-doors/?module=BlogPost-ReadMore

It challenges the reader with a problem in logic:

You're in a dungeon with two doors. One leads to escape, the other to
execution. There are only two other people in the room, one of whom
always tells the truth, while the other always lies. You don't know
which is which, but they know that the other always lies or tells the
truth. You can ask one of them one question, but, of course, you don't
know whether you'll be speaking to the truth-teller or the liar. So
what single question can you ask one of them that will enable you to
figure out which door is which and make your escape?

The standard answer is an application of a second-order logic. In
short, ask one of the dungeon-keeps what the other would reply, but
here's a more convoluted way to reason about this:

I asked my ninth grader how he'd figure this out. He said, ask a
dungeon-keeper a question you know the truth of; 'Is 1 + 1 == 2?'
Presuming "lying" means saying "false" when something is true, so this
question discovers which dungeon-keep is which.  But you only get to
ask one question, so the problem is to pose one question that combines
the '1+1 == 2' question with "Is that door (e.g. you point to one) the
one you claim to be the escape?" Combine these as an "if and only if":
For the truth-teller & the escape door both premises are true, so
she'd answer "true" For the liar both premises are false so they'd
also answer true.  The remaining two cases are left to the reader :)

 

Now clearly this is not the obvious solution that many readers
offered, but its an interesting alternative showing how to work
through the logic.

Note that the obvious solution requres a second order predicate -
"what do you claim that the other dungeon-guard" would claim?" but
this solution only requires a simple "claim" predicate.
